



(sec:suite-v1)=
# Benchmark Suite (v1)

TO DO...



::::{todo}
List of datasets, n, d, number of label vectors, numbers of labels, noise
::::

Each dataset represent *n* points in $\mathbb{R}^d$
and is accompanied by at least one reference partition.






> Datasets are available at <https://github.com/gagolews/clustering-data-v1>.
> Raw results generated by many clustering algorithms can be found at
> <https://github.com/gagolews/clustering-results-v1/>.

Version 1 of our benchmark suite consists of 9 benchmark batteries:

1. {ref}`sec:battery-sipu`
2. {ref}`sec:battery-fcps`
3. {ref}`sec:battery-graves`
4. {ref}`sec:battery-uci`
5. {ref}`sec:battery-wut`
6. {ref}`sec:battery-mnist`
7. {ref}`sec:battery-other`
8. {ref}`sec:battery-g2mg`
9. {ref}`sec:battery-h2mg`

Each battery consists of several datasets.
When referring to them, we use the convention `battery/dataset`,
e.g, `wut/x2`.

The datasets and the corresponding ground truth labels
can be explored {ref}`here <sec:data-v1>`.

Results of different clustering algorithms can be browsed
{ref}`here <sec:results-v1>`.

**Version 1** of the benchmark datasets suite, dated 8 May 2020,
is available at <https://github.com/gagolews/clustering-data-v1>
([DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3815066](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3815066)).
Raw results generated by many clustering algorithms can be found at
<https://github.com/gagolews/clustering-results-v1/>.
They are provided solely for research purposes,
unless stated otherwise. Please cite the literature references mentioned
in the description files corresponding to each dataset if you use
them in your publications.


As mentioned in the {ref}`sec:file-format` section,
each dataset is accompanied by a text file
specifying more details thereon (e.g., literature references).


## Data Sources

There is some inherent overlap between the original databases.
We have tried to resolve any conflicts in the *best* possible manner.

Some datasets are equipped with
{ref}`additional reference labellings <sec:many-partitions>`
that did not appear in the original setting.





(sec:battery-sipu)=
## `sipu`

An excellent battery of 20 diverse datasets created or compiled
by P. Fränti and his colleagues and research students
from the University of Eastern Finland.
Available for download from <https://cs.joensuu.fi/sipu/datasets/>;
see {cite}`kmsix` for discussion:

* `a1`, `a2`, `a3`       {cite}`KarkkainenFranti2002:asets`,
* `aggregation`          {cite}`GionisETAL2007:clustagg`,
* `birch1`, `birch2`     {cite}`ZhangETAL1997:birch`,
* `compound`             {cite}`Zahn1971:gestalt`,
* `d31`, `r15`           {cite}`VeenmanETAL2002:maxvar`,
* `flame`                {cite}`FuMedico2005:flame`,
* `jain`                 {cite}`JainLaw2005:dilemma`,
* `pathbased`, `spiral`  {cite}`ChangYeung2008:pathbased`,
* `s1`, `s2`, `s3`, `s4` {cite}`FrantiVirmajoki2006:ssets`,
* `unbalance`            {cite}`psi`,
* `worms_2`, `worms_64`  {cite}`SieranojaFranti2019:densitypeaks`.


We have not included the `G2` sets as we suggest
the cluster variances should be corrected for space dimensionality;
see {ref}`sec:battery-g2mg` for an alternative.
`Birch3` is not included as no ground-truth labels were provided.
We excluded the `DIM`-sets as they are too easy for most algorithms.



(sec:battery-fcps)=
## `fcps`

9 datasets from the *Fundamental Clustering Problem Suite*
proposed by A. Ultsch {cite}`fcps` from the Marburg University,
Germany.

Each dataset consists of 212–4096 observations in 2–3 dimensions.
The `GolfBall` dataset is not included as it has no cluster structure.
`Tetragonula` and `Leukemia` are also not part of our suite
as they are given as distance matrices.

Data were originally available from elsewhere, but now
can be accessed, e.g., via the R package
[*FCPS*](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=FCPS);
see also {cite}`ThrunUltsch2020:fcps`.


(sec:battery-graves)=
## `graves`

10 *synthetic data sets* discussed by D. Graves and W. Pedrycz
in {cite}`graves`.

Each dataset consists of 200–1050 observations in 2 dimensions.
Originally, they come with no reference labels.




(sec:battery-uci)=
## `uci`

A selection of 8 datasets available at UCI
(University of California, Irvine)
[Machine Learning Repository](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/)
{cite}`uci`.

Some of these datasets were considered for benchmark purposes
in, amongst others, {cite}`graves`.
They are also listed in the {ref}`sec:battery-sipu` battery.



(sec:battery-wut)=
## `wut`

22 datasets in $\mathbb{R}^2$ or $\mathbb{R}^3$
authored by the fantastic students of Marek's 2016/2017
R and Python for Data Analysis courses at the
[Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science](https://www.pw.edu.pl/engpw/Academics/Faculties/Faculty-of-Mathematics-and-Information-Science), Warsaw University of Technology:
Anna Gierlak,
Eliza Kaczorek,
Mateusz Kobyłka,
Przemysław Kosewski,
Jędrzej Krauze,
Michał Maciąg,
Aleksander Truszczyński,
and
Adam Wawrzeńczyk.
Thanks!



(sec:battery-mnist)=
## `mnist`

1. [MNIST database](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MNIST_database)
    of handwritten digits (a preprocessed remix of
    [NIST](https://www.nist.gov/srd/nist-special-database-19) data
    made by Y. LeCun, C. Cortes, and C.J.C. Burges);

2. [Fashion-MNIST](https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist) –
    a similarly-structured dataset of Zalando articles
    compiled by H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf;
    see {cite}`fashion_mnist`.

Both datasets consist of 70,000 flattened 28x28 grayscale images
(train and test samples combined).



(sec:battery-other)=
## `other`

Datasets from other sources

* `hdbscan` - a dataset used for demonstrating the outputs of the
    [Python implementation](https://github.com/scikit-learn-contrib/hdbscan)
    of the HDBSCAN (Campello et al., 2015) algorithm

    Source: <https://github.com/scikit-learn-contrib/hdbscan/blob/master/notebooks/clusterable_data.npy>

* `chameleon_t4_8k`, `chameleon_t5_8k`, `chameleon_t7_10k`,
    `chameleon_t8_8k` - datasets supposedly related to the
    CHAMELEON algorithm (Karypis et al., 1999).

    Source: <http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/cluto/cluto/download>

    In fact, (Karypis et al., 1999) studies two of the above
    and two quite different ones:
    `chameleon_t7_10k` is named `DS3` in the paper, while
    `chameleon_t8_8k` is referred to as `DS4`.
    The `DS2` set looks like a more noisy version of `fcps_twodiamonds`.
    Interestingly,  [SIPU](https://cs.joensuu.fi/sipu/datasets/) also provides
    `chameleon_t4_8k` and suggests its relation with CHAMELEON, but
    its screenshot does not appear in the paper.

* `iris`, `iris5` - "the" (for discussion see Bezdek et al., 1999)
    famous Iris {cite}`Fisher1936:iris`
    dataset and its imbalanced version considered
    in {cite}`genieins`.


as well as some datasets of unknown/unconfirmed origin
(TODO: help needed).

(sec:battery-g2mg)=
## `g2mg`

a modified version of `G2`-sets from SIPU with variances
dependent on datasets' dimensionalities, i.e., s*np.sqrt(d/2),
which makes these problems more difficult.

Each dataset consists of 2048 observations belonging
to either of two Gaussian clusters in 1, 2, ..., 128 dimensions.


(sec:battery-h2mg)=
## `h2mg`

two Gaussian-like hubs with spread dependent on datasets' dimensionalities

Each dataset consists of 2048 observations in 1, 2, ..., 128 dimensions.
Each point is sampled from a sphere centred at its own cluster's centre,
of radius that follows the Gaussian distribution with a predefined scale.


